The latter will be used

by Microsoft in its new online entertainment service to help

people identify the kind of restaurants or entertainment they

are most likely to enjoy.
But Gates dismissed such reservations.
Is this alien-sounding technology

Microsoft’s new secret weapon?
Bayesian networks are complex diagrams that organize the

body of knowledge in any given area by mapping out cause-andeffect

relationships among key variables and encoding them

with numbers that represent the extent to which one variable

is likely to affect another.
Programmed into computers, these systems can automatically

generate optimal predictions or decisions even when key pieces

of information are missing.
When Microsoft in 1993 hired Eric Horvitz, David Heckerman

and Jack Breese, pioneers in the development of Bayesian systems,

colleagues in the field were surprised.
The field was still

an obscure, largely academic enterprise.
Today the field is still obscure.
But scratch the surface of

a range of new Microsoft products and you’re likely to find

Bayesian networks embedded in the software.
And Bayesian

nets are being built into models that are used to predict oil and

stock prices, control the space shuttle and diagnose disease.
Microsoft is unquestionably the most aggressive in exploiting

the new approach.
The company offers a free Web service that

helps customers diagnose printing problems with their computers

and recommends the quickest way to resolve them.
The latest version of Microsoft Office software uses the technology

to offer a user help based on past experience, how the

mouse is being moved and what task is being done.
“If his actions show he is distracted, he is likely to need help,”

Horvitz says.
“If he’s been working on a chart, chances are he

needs help formatting the chart”.
Although the company did important work for the National

Aeronautics and Space Administration and on medical diagnostics,

Horvitz says, “It’s not like your grandmother will use

it”.
Microsoft’s activities in the field are now helping to build a

groundswell of support for Bayesian ideas.
